README.md, before:

# chef-vault-demo-cookbook

## Some of the prerequisites (for demonstrators/contributors only)

- I've created an s3 bucket, `s3://chef-vault-demo` that has two objects,
  - unikitten.png (1.7Mb)
  - minikitten.png (417Kb)
- I've created an AWS user, `chef-vault-demo` which has the following policy applied, so it can do nothing except GET those objects
```
Show Policy
 {
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "Stmt1454343707000",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:GetObject"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::chef-vault-demo/unikitten.png",
                "arn:aws:s3:::chef-vault-demo/minikitten.png"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```
- this cookbook runs a lot faster using `inspec` and `kitchen-dokken`. The command `rake dokken` symlinks `_kitchen.local.yml` to `.kitchen.local.yml` so you can use. As of 1 Feb 2016, this required local installation of the gem from https://github.com/chef/kitchen-inspec so you can use Inspec against docker.

## 0: Doing it all in cleartext

See video to see the details

- git clone this repo
- update the inspec tests
- update the recipe
- test-kitchen

## 1: Use a template and variables

1. Move content to `templates/default/s3cfg.erb`
2. Use variables `aws_access_key` and `aws_secret_key`
3. Set variables and use them in them template

## 2: Use a data bag

```
git checkout v2-initial-databag
git diff origin/v1 -- recipes
git diff origin/v1 -- data_bags
```

In the recipe we've replaced the variable assignments with a fetch from a data bag:

```
aws = data_bag_item('cleartext', 'aws')
aws_secret_key = aws['aws_secret_key']
aws_access_key = aws['aws_access_key']
```

and we've now created a databag, as JSON, at data_bags/cleartext/aws.json, with contents:

```
{
  "id": "aws",
  "aws_access_key": "AKIAJWLDGDWB6HVRMRAQ",
  "aws_secret_key": "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"
}
```


## 3: Encrypted data bags

```
git checkout v3-encrypted-databag
```

Make the secret from random data

```
mkdir -p files/default/
openssl rand -base64 512 |
  tr -d '\r\n' > files/default/encrypted_data_bag_secret
```

For testing, we'll use the `-z`option to `knife` for local-mode operations (a.k.a 'chef-zero'). To create an encrypted data bag from our cleartext `aws.json`:

```
knife data bag -z create encrypted
knife data bag -z from file encrypted data_bags/cleartext/aws.json --secret-file files/default/encrypted_data_bag_secret
```

and we'll update our recipe....

## 3.99 Refresh everything for vault demo

```

aws autoscaling set-desired-capacity \
  --auto-scaling-group-name vault-provision \
  --desired-capacity 0

chef-server-ctl org-delete nightwatch
for user in starly jsnow jslynt; do
  chef-server-ctl user-delete $user
done


aws autoscaling set-desired-capacity \
  --auto-scaling-group-name vault-provision \
  --desired-capacity 3

```

## 4.0: Setting up to use vault

Using vault with test-kitchen and chef-zero/local-mode is non-obvious, so we'll go to using real user and nodes.  From the branch on the code is set up as a chef-repo instead of just a single cookbook.

On a chef-server, we'll need to:
- create an `organization`, "nightwatch"
- associate my user, `pdb`, with that organization
- create three users, 'jsnow' and 'starly' for that organization
  - and be sure to save all the relevant keys

To wit:

```
myuser=pdb
chef-server-ctl org-create nightwatch Nightwatch -f nightwatch.pem -a $myuser

chef-server-ctl user-create jsnow Jon Snow \
  jsnow@castleblack.we winteriscoming -f jsnow.pem
chef-server-ctl user-create starly Sam Tarly \
  starly@castleblack.we firstinbattle -f starly.pem
chef-server-ctl user-create jslynt Janos Slynt \
  jslynt@castleblack.we notmentioned -f jslynt.pem

chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch jsnow --admin
chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch starly
chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch jslynt
```

Let's make sure to fetch all these `.pem` files:

```
mychefserver="ubuntu@chefserver.cheffian.com"
for pem in nightwatch jsnow starly jslynt; do
  scp $mychefserver:$pem.pem $HOME/.chef/cheffian/
done
```

To use this org I have my `.chef/knife.rb` set up to use the CHEF_SERVER env var, like this:

```
export CHEF_SERVER=nightwatch
```

Now I can test that we're all connected:

```
knife user list
```

Let's create a vault to store our credentials:

```
knife vault create \
  credentials \
  aws \
  -A starly,jsnow \
  -M client \
  -S 'name:whitewalker_node_*' \
  -J data_bags/cleartext/aws.json
```

Returns:

```
WARNING: No clients were returned from search, you may not have got what you expected!!
```

Unpack what each of the arguments are...

What have we done here? Let's look:

```
knife vault show credentials aws -M client
# compare to non-admin user
CHEF_USER=jslynt knife vault show credentials aws -M client
```

Under the covers, chef-vault is just some client-side code on top of data bags. First, let's look at the data bag item `credentials/aws`, then `credentials/aws_keys`

```
knife data bag show credentials aws
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
```

## 4.1: Let's use vault in our code and set up our test instances

To the cookbook's `metadata.rb` add `depends 'chef-vault'` and to default recipe, we'll now have:

```
# install gem and stuff
include_recipe ‘chef-vault’

# fetch the aws item from the credentials vault
aws = chef_vault_item(:credentials, 'aws')
aws_secret_key = aws['aws_secret_key']
aws_access_key = aws['aws_access_key']
```

### 4.1.1: An aside on AWS provisioning

To use this we need some nodes. The cookbook `vault-provision` creates an AWS autoscale group with TKTK nodes, and pre-installs `chef-client` on them. I use the cookbook to stand up the nodes like this:

```
export AWS_DEFAULT_PROFILE=default
chef-client -z cookbooks/vault-provision/recipes/ws_autoscaling.rb
```

```
function vault-demo-ids() {
 aws autoscaling describe-auto-scaling-groups --auto-scaling-group-names vault-provision | jq -r '[.AutoScalingGroups[].Instances[].InstanceId] | join(" ")'
}


function vault-demo-ips() {
  instance_ids=$(vault-demo-ids)
  aws ec2 describe-instances --instance-ids $instance_ids | jq -r '.Reservations[].Instances[].PublicIpAddress'
}

alias terminate-vault-id='aws autoscaling terminate-instance-in-auto-scaling-group --no-should-decrement-desired-capacity --instance-id '  
}

NODE_ARRAY=( $(vault-demo-ips) )
ARRAY_IDS=( $(vault-demo-ids) )
```

## 4.2 First test

- Bootstrap a node with no run_list
- Update the vault
- Converge the node to the run_list
- Verify

```
knife bootstrap ${NODE_ARRAY[0]} \
  -N whitewalker_node_0 \
  --hint ec2 \
  -r ''    \
  --sudo     -x ubuntu

knife node list
```

Review the vault and Update

```
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
knife vault refresh credentials aws -M client
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
```

Converge node to a run_list

```
knife ssh 'name:white*' -x ubuntu 'sudo chef-client'
```

Verify
```
alias inspec_exec='inspec exec cookbooks/vault-demo/test/integration/default/serverspec/default_spec.rb --key-files  ~/.ssh/pburkholder-one'
inspec_exec -t ssh://ubuntu@${ARRAY[0]}
```

## 4.2 Bootstrap with --vault-bootstrap

## 4.3 How to update a vault item

## 4.4 Some weaknesses

- autoscaling
- node impersonation attack
- data-bag write-lock issues
- vault-admins not the same set of folks as the chef-admins

Commit message:

Distinguish between server setup and vault setup

README.md, after:

# chef-vault-demo-cookbook

## Some of the prerequisites (for demonstrators/contributors only)

- I've created an s3 bucket, `s3://chef-vault-demo` that has two objects,
  - unikitten.png (1.7Mb)
  - minikitten.png (417Kb)
- I've created an AWS user, `chef-vault-demo` which has the following policy applied, so it can do nothing except GET those objects
```
Show Policy
 {
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "Stmt1454343707000",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:GetObject"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::chef-vault-demo/unikitten.png",
                "arn:aws:s3:::chef-vault-demo/minikitten.png"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```
- this cookbook runs a lot faster using `inspec` and `kitchen-dokken`. The command `rake dokken` symlinks `_kitchen.local.yml` to `.kitchen.local.yml` so you can use. As of 1 Feb 2016, this required local installation of the gem from https://github.com/chef/kitchen-inspec so you can use Inspec against docker.

## 0: Doing it all in cleartext

See video to see the details

- git clone this repo
- update the inspec tests
- update the recipe
- test-kitchen

## 1: Use a template and variables

1. Move content to `templates/default/s3cfg.erb`
2. Use variables `aws_access_key` and `aws_secret_key`
3. Set variables and use them in them template

## 2: Use a data bag

```
git checkout v2-initial-databag
git diff origin/v1 -- recipes
git diff origin/v1 -- data_bags
```

In the recipe we've replaced the variable assignments with a fetch from a data bag:

```
aws = data_bag_item('cleartext', 'aws')
aws_secret_key = aws['aws_secret_key']
aws_access_key = aws['aws_access_key']
```

and we've now created a databag, as JSON, at data_bags/cleartext/aws.json, with contents:

```
{
  "id": "aws",
  "aws_access_key": "AKIAJWLDGDWB6HVRMRAQ",
  "aws_secret_key": "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"
}
```


## 3: Encrypted data bags

```
git checkout v3-encrypted-databag
```

Make the secret from random data

```
mkdir -p files/default/
openssl rand -base64 512 |
  tr -d '\r\n' > files/default/encrypted_data_bag_secret
```

For testing, we'll use the `-z`option to `knife` for local-mode operations (a.k.a 'chef-zero'). To create an encrypted data bag from our cleartext `aws.json`:

```
knife data bag -z create encrypted
knife data bag -z from file encrypted data_bags/cleartext/aws.json --secret-file files/default/encrypted_data_bag_secret
```

and we'll update our recipe....

## 3.99 Refresh everything for vault demo

```

aws autoscaling set-desired-capacity \
  --auto-scaling-group-name vault-provision \
  --desired-capacity 0

chef-server-ctl org-delete nightwatch
for user in starly jsnow jslynt; do
  chef-server-ctl user-delete $user
done


aws autoscaling set-desired-capacity \
  --auto-scaling-group-name vault-provision \
  --desired-capacity 3

```

## 4.0: Setting up to use vault
**
Using vault with test-kitchen and chef-zero/local-mode is non-obvious, so we'll go to using real user and nodes.  From the branch on the code is set up as a chef-repo instead of just a single cookbook.

### 4.0.0: Set up the chef-server users and orgs

On a chef-server, we'll need to:
- create an `organization`, "nightwatch"
- associate my user, `pdb`, with that organization
- create three users, 'jsnow' and 'starly' for that organization
  - and be sure to save all the relevant keys

To wit:

```
myuser=pdb
chef-server-ctl org-create nightwatch Nightwatch -f nightwatch.pem -a $myuser

chef-server-ctl user-create jsnow Jon Snow \
  jsnow@castleblack.we winteriscoming -f jsnow.pem
chef-server-ctl user-create starly Sam Tarly \
  starly@castleblack.we firstinbattle -f starly.pem
chef-server-ctl user-create jslynt Janos Slynt \
  jslynt@castleblack.we notmentioned -f jslynt.pem

chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch jsnow --admin
chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch starly
chef-server-ctl org-user-add nightwatch jslynt
```

Let's make sure to fetch all these `.pem` files:

```
mychefserver="ubuntu@chefserver.cheffian.com"
for pem in nightwatch jsnow starly jslynt; do
  scp $mychefserver:$pem.pem $HOME/.chef/cheffian/
done
```

To use this org I have my `.chef/knife.rb` set up to use the CHEF_SERVER env var, like this:

```
export CHEF_SERVER=nightwatch
```

Now I can test that we're all connected:

```
knife user list
```

### 4.0.1: Create the vault


Let's create a vault to store our credentials:

```
knife vault create \
  credentials \
  aws \
  -A starly,jsnow \
  -M client \
  -S 'name:whitewalker_node_*' \
  -J data_bags/cleartext/aws.json
```

Returns:

```
WARNING: No clients were returned from search, you may not have got what you expected!!
```

Unpack what each of the arguments are...

What have we done here? Let's look:

```
knife vault show credentials aws -M client
# compare to non-admin user
CHEF_USER=jslynt knife vault show credentials aws -M client
```

Under the covers, chef-vault is just some client-side code on top of data bags. First, let's look at the data bag item `credentials/aws`, then `credentials/aws_keys`

```
knife data bag show credentials aws
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
```

## 4.1: Let's use vault in our code and set up our test instances

To the cookbook's `metadata.rb` add `depends 'chef-vault'` and to default recipe, we'll now have:

```
# install gem and stuff
include_recipe ‘chef-vault’

# fetch the aws item from the credentials vault
aws = chef_vault_item(:credentials, 'aws')
aws_secret_key = aws['aws_secret_key']
aws_access_key = aws['aws_access_key']
```

### 4.1.1: An aside on AWS provisioning

To use this we need some nodes. The cookbook `vault-provision` creates an AWS autoscale group with TKTK nodes, and pre-installs `chef-client` on them. I use the cookbook to stand up the nodes like this:

```
export AWS_DEFAULT_PROFILE=default
chef-client -z cookbooks/vault-provision/recipes/ws_autoscaling.rb
```

```
function vault-demo-ids() {
 aws autoscaling describe-auto-scaling-groups --auto-scaling-group-names vault-provision | jq -r '[.AutoScalingGroups[].Instances[].InstanceId] | join(" ")'
}


function vault-demo-ips() {
  instance_ids=$(vault-demo-ids)
  aws ec2 describe-instances --instance-ids $instance_ids | jq -r '.Reservations[].Instances[].PublicIpAddress'
}

alias terminate-vault-id='aws autoscaling terminate-instance-in-auto-scaling-group --no-should-decrement-desired-capacity --instance-id '  
}

NODE_ARRAY=( $(vault-demo-ips) )
ARRAY_IDS=( $(vault-demo-ids) )
```

## 4.2 First test

- Bootstrap a node with no run_list
- Update the vault
- Converge the node to the run_list
- Verify

```
knife bootstrap ${NODE_ARRAY[0]} \
  -N whitewalker_node_0 \
  --hint ec2 \
  -r ''    \
  --sudo     -x ubuntu

knife node list
```

Review the vault and Update

```
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
knife vault refresh credentials aws -M client
knife data bag show credentials aws_keys
```

Converge node to a run_list

```
knife ssh 'name:white*' -x ubuntu 'sudo chef-client'
```

Verify
```
alias inspec_exec='inspec exec cookbooks/vault-demo/test/integration/default/serverspec/default_spec.rb --key-files  ~/.ssh/pburkholder-one'
inspec_exec -t ssh://ubuntu@${ARRAY[0]}
```

## 4.2 Bootstrap with --vault-bootstrap

## 4.3 How to update a vault item

## 4.4 Some weaknesses

- autoscaling
- node impersonation attack
- data-bag write-lock issues
- vault-admins not the same set of folks as the chef-admins
